---
title: "Converting JSON to JS"
description: A short entry to the json-to-js utility
image: "/assets/2019/json-to-js.jpg"
category: "tooling"
tags: "js json tools"
twitter_text: skarby.info an blog post on json-to-js
introduction: On the json-to-js CLI utility
published: true
published_date: 2019-10-10
legacy_url: json-to-js
---

Every now and again you find yourself doing the same repetitive task over and over again.
I just happened to face such a task, as I was refactoring code that loaded JSON into a Jassmine test.

> So, what's wrong with that?

...You might ask!

Well, separating _test data_ from a unit test is bad practice, even though it may increase re-usability.
This is due to the fact that test data is imperative to the tests being written.

So, to take this full circle, I was finding myself taking json syntax, as:

```json
{
  "test": "data",
  "numeric": 42,
  "complex": {
    "name": "John Doe",
    "occupation": "Assassin"
  }
}
```

into javascript object notation, as:

```js
const data = {
  test: "data",
  numeric: 42,
  complex: {
    name: "John Doe",
    occupation: "Assassin",
  },
};
```

## Solutions

So, as any developer I first took "the manual, believed to be easy - however proving to be slow approach".

### The manual approach

Converting a file by copying the _JSON_ structure into the _JS_ file was the first approach I chose. Initially I didn't
see a problem with this solution.

It was a task of:

1. Copy the _JSON_ structure to a _JS_ file.
2. Remove quotation marks from property names.
3. Replace quotation marks from string values, with apostrophes

Did it take long for a single file... well, no? Did I have more than a single file...
yes, so I got bored fairly quickly doing so!

### Using my IDE

My next idea was to use my IDE to solve the problem - I am using [Webstorm](https://www.jetbrains.com/webstorm), btw.
But unfortunately I didn't find any build-in functionality nor a plugin to resolve the problem at hand.

If I had been using [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com), then I would have been more at luck. I managed to find
the [JSON to JS Object](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=sallar.json-to-js-object) plugin - but as already
mentioned, it's not my first choice of IDE.

### Using a CLI

My final way out, would be to use a CLI tool. Granted, it wouldn't be a solution integrated into my IDE - however that's not too big
of a deal, since I already seem to spend a great deal of my development time in the terminal.

I happened to go with the tool [json-to-js](https://json-to-js.com/) (you can find instructions on how-to install the tool on
their website).

I simply added an alias to my [shell-interpreter](https://github.com/robbyrussell/oh-my-zsh), eg.:

```bash
alias j2j="pbpaste | json-to-js | pbcopy"
```

Doing so I was able to:

1. Copy the _JSON_ structure (to clipboard)
2. Execute `j2j` in my terminal
3. Paste the _JS_ code from my clipboard to my IDE

## Conclusion

I managed to reduce the time spend doing the task - but I can see myself improving the solution even further.
I should be able to either bind a keyboard shortcut (either in my IDE, or in [MacOS](https://www.apple.com/dk/macos/catalina/))
to run the terminal alias I had created.

I havn't gotten that far, though... I'll update this post if I ever get around to it!
