---
title: Scripting with Google ZX
description: I'm a big fan of shell scripts, but I forget the syntax... Google's ZX to the resque!
image: "2021/2021-09-12-zx.jpg"
category: "productivity"
tags: "terminal shell scripting"
twitter_text: skarby.info a blog post on Google's ZX
introduction: On scripting with Google ZX
published: true
published_date: 2021-09-12
licenses:
  - forItem: "post image"
    from: "pixabay"
    url: "https://pixabay.com/photos/sea-beach-ocean-tropical-paradise-1284467/"
references:
  - name: "Google ZX"
    url: "https://github.com/google/zx"
---

I love scripting things, to avoid doing repetitive tasks. There are a few tools in my toolset to accomplish
that - I can script using [Node.js][nodejs], or [bash] - or automate at a higher level using [Puppet][puppet],
[Ansible][ansible] or [Chef][chef]. I do however find myself using [bash] scripting a lot.

Don't get me wrong, [bash] is a good scripting language, but the syntax is "so-and-so", and this is most likely
due to me confusing things. The name [bash] stands for "**B**ourne-**A**gain **SH**ell", which means that it's
a new (or enhanced) version of the [sh] scripting language. There are never commands, and syntax constructs are
not necessarily uniform (to my taste at least)! I tend to forget the syntax. I remember basics such as, declaring
and using a variabel name, doing a simple `if`-statement construct and evaluating a command's exit codes - apart
from that, I'll have to consult google.

Since I'm doing a lot of JavaScript development, I do see [Node.js][nodejs] as an option for scripting - but the
interaction with processes, piping output to and from various CLI programs is "clunky"... that's probably the best
word I can use for that. It'll get the job done... but it's just... clunky!

## Benefits of JavaScript

One of the major benefits I see, by using JavaScript as a scripting language (for shell scripting), when compared to
[bash] scripting is in regard to the syntax. I'm primarily a developer doing software development in Java, JavaScript,
TypeScript and to some degree C# (primarily for Unity / game development). So, the C-like syntax is much more familiar
to me. You might ask yourself, is that a big deal? - the answer to that question is "Yes". So why is syntax familiarity
important. Well, it all comes down to context switching... and my primary focus of shell scripting is to automate
repetitive tasks, which often occurs whilst doing development. Doing less context switching, keeps my productivity up!

Another benefit of using JavaScript, is that it's dynamically typed (as opposed to using a statically typed language).
When writing shell scripts, it's usually a task of automating a shell repetitive flow by trial and error - that's where
JavaScript can really "shine".

## Introducing Google ZX

So, let's me introduce [Google's ZX][zx] - a library that allows you to easily write shell scripts, using JavaScript, but
avoiding the "chunkiness" of using vanilla [Node.js][nodejs]'s standard libraries and "callback hell"-programming
paradigm.

You write your scripts in modern JavaScript! That's a version of JavaScript where you can utilise `async` / `await`,
along with ECMAScript modules (that's using the `import` / `export` keywords, but the old CJS `require`-function is
available for you as a default polyfill), along with lexically scoped variables (`let`and `const`), not to forget using
"fat arrow syntax"-functions (e.g. `(squareOf) => squareOf ** 2`).

If you're the kind of developers who like typed constructs ("well hello there, buddy 😉"), you can utilize TypeScript for
your [ZX][zx] script files, and they will be compiled (behind the scenes) before being executed. I really love that feature!

There's nothing magical about [Google's ZX][zx] - it's all basic [Node.js][nodejs] libraries being used "behind the scenes"!
Spawning processes is done using the `spawn`-function (from the `child_process` package), but it's wrapped in a neat `$`-function,
inducing nostalgia vibes from the good 'ol days when you used [JQuery](https://jquery.com/) for your frontend JavaScript development.

The [ZX][zx] API is promise-based, and given a non-successful executing of a shell command (that's one with an exit code of a value
different from zero (`0`)), it will throw a `ProcessOutput` object containing useful information such as `stdout`, `stderr` and
the before mentioned exit code of execution.

Combining all that, you have a pretty sleek basis for writing your scripts!

## Installation and Usage

Since [Google's ZX][zx] doesn't come pre-shipped with any operating system, you have to install it yourself. There's only a single
pre-requisite; [Node.js][nodejs] (version 14.8.0 or greater, at the time of writing this article). I, as always, recommend you to
use [Node Version Manager](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm) (to install [Node.js][nodejs], but installing the default LTS-version of
[Node.js][nodejs] (through any means of installation) will get the job done.

Next, all you'll have to do is install [ZX][zx] as a global dependency:

```shell
npm i -g zx
```

... and now you're good to go!

This will allow you to run any ZX-script, by simply executing the script in question, eg.: `./my-script.mjs`. If you don't feel like
installing [ZX][zx] as a global dependency, you'll still be able to execute it using [npx](https://www.npmjs.com/package/npx), but you'll
have to execute your scripts a bit differently, eg.: `npx zx ./my-script.mjs` - not quite as elegant!

## Implicit inclusions

Since we're running in [Node.js][nodejs], we have access to all their core packages, as well as packages available from [npm]. However,
that's not really something we have to look too much into, since [ZX][zx] comes bundled with a set of 3rd party packages, that are made
globally available.

These dependencies are implicitly included / imported (exposed as global variables without explicitly using the `import` keyword).

You're not limited to using these packages, since you have the entire [Node.js][nodejs] and [npm] eco-system available to you. I do
however find that the built-in inclusions cover 99.99% of most use-cases I've encountered.

[node-fetch](https://www.npmjs.com/package/node-fetch)

... which is a package that makes the browser's [Fetch API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API) available to the
[Node.js][nodejs] runtime. The API is made accessible through the global `fetch`-function.

[chalk]

... which is a package that provides a utility API for outputting ANSI control character, providing colored output. The API is made
accessible through the global `chalk`-variable.

[fs-extra](https://www.npmjs.com/package/fs-extra)

... which is a package that provides additional utility functions (not available to the core [fs](https://nodejs.org/api/fs.html)).
Furthermore, it provides promise support to the `fs`-API (which wasn't a thing in older Node versions). The API is made available through
the global `fs`-variable.

[globby](https://github.com/sindresorhus/globby)

... which is a package that provides APIs available for using globs (which are useful for input arguments to scripts). The API is made
available through the global async `globby`- and `glob`-functions, or synchronously from `globby.globbySync`-function.

[os](https://nodejs.org/api/os.html)

... which is a core [Node.js][nodejs] package, making OS-specific information available to the script. The API is made available through
the global `os`-variable.

[path](https://nodejs.org/api/path.html)

... which is a core [Node.js][nodejs] package, making working with paths easy (from a lexical context). The API is made available through
the global `path`-variable.

[minimist](https://www.npmjs.com/package/minimist)

... which is a package that provides an API for parsing arguments, flags and options that are passed to the script. The API is made
available through the global `argv`-variable.

## Example

Let's have a look at a real-life (complete script) example - to me, it's always easier to understand something in a real-life context,
than a thought-up example, looking at documentation or code snippets.

The example I've written is a small script that looks through a set of files, and looks for occurrences of the word `TODO`. If any are
found, it will print them out along with location and line numbers (using colors). This is not really a use case that immediately justifies
using [ZX][zx], since it could be accomplished using `find`, `xargs` and `grep` alone - but future enhancements will be easier to implement
when using JavaScript as a scripting language.

We will be using the `find`-, `xargs`- and `grep`-commands (through [ZX][zx]), but not utilizing the full potential of [ZX][zx],
given a somewhat weak use case. To be honest, coming up with a great example is difficult. I did think of creating a utility installation
script (but that would be difficult to keep "short, sweet and to the point")... get back to me if you have better use case ideas?

Here's the full script:

```javascript
#!/usr/bin/env zx

// Utility functions for outputting to terminal (with colors)
const log = console.log;
const error = (msg) => log(chalk.bold.bgRed("ERROR") + " " + msg);
const info = (msg) => log(chalk.bold.bgBlue("INFO") + "  " + msg);
const fatal = (msg, code = 1) => {
  error(msg);
  process.exit(code);
};

const header = (title) => {
  const line = Array(title.length + 2)
    .fill("\u2500")
    .join("");
  log(chalk.bgGray(`\u250c${line}\u2510`));
  log(chalk.bgGray(`\u2502 ${title} \u2502`));
  log(chalk.bgGray(`\u2514${line}\u2518`));
};

// Don't echo commands
$.verbose = false;

// Determine locations to check for TODOs
const locations = [];
if (argv._.length > 1) {
  locations.push(argv._[1]);
} else if (argv.location) {
  try {
    const content = await fs.readFile(argv.location, "utf-8");
    locations.push(...content.split("\n"));
  } catch {
    fatal("Unable to read locations from file: " + argv.location);
  }
} else {
  fatal(
    "Unable to determine locations to perform analysis upon (either specify with " +
      chalk.bold("--location") +
      " option, or provide location directly!"
  );
}

// Determine types of files to analyze
const types = [];
if (argv.types) {
  types.push(
    ...argv.types
      .split(",")
      .map((each) => each.trim())
      .filter((each) => each.length > 0)
      .map((each) => `*.${each}`)
  );
} else {
  info(
    "Unable to determine file types for analysis (can be provided with " +
      chalk.bold("--types") +
      " option) - fallback to checking on all files..."
  );
  types.push("*.*");
}

// Iterate through occurrences and check for To-Dos
for (let location of locations) {
  header(`To-Dos at "${location}"`);
  for (let type of types) {
    // Use find, xargs and grep commands to find occurrences
    const process =
      await $`find ${location} -type f -name ${type} -print0`.pipe(
        nothrow($`xargs -0 grep -n TODO`)
      );

    // Print occurences
    for (let match of process.stdout.split("\n")) {
      const [file, line, ...todo] = match.split(":").map((each) => each.trim());
      if (file && line && todo) {
        log(
          chalk.blueBright("Found ") +
            chalk.bold(todo) +
            ` (in file: ${file}, line: ${line})`
        );
      }
    }
  }
}
```

To run the script, you should copy the contents to a file with an `.mjs`-extension - this is to be able to utilize top-level
`await`-statements. An alternative solution is to put the script file in a file with a `.js`-extension, but that also requires
you to wrap the script contents in an anonymous function, e.g.:

```javascript
void (async function () {
  // Content of script file goes here...
})();
```

Lastly, set the executable flag of the script (executing `chmod +x <path-to-script>`), and you're "good to go"!

### Script dissection

There's a couple of interesting parts of the scripts, to focus upon. Let's have a look at these points:

#### Chalk and unicode

I find that terminal output is made more readable by adding colors and graphics, which is why I made `error`- and `info`-utility
functions available (that prefix output with a background-colored label). Having the script support multiple locations (to analyse),
I needed to print headers for each location, which is why I came up with the `header`-function.

```javascript
const header = (title) => {
  const line = Array(title.length + 2)
    .fill("\u2500")
    .join("");
  log(chalk.bgGray(`\u250c${line}\u2510`));
  log(chalk.bgGray(`\u2502 ${title} \u2502`));
  log(chalk.bgGray(`\u2514${line}\u2518`));
};
```

It uses [chalk] to "add color", and a combination of string manipulation to draw a box around the passed in `title`-argument. Uni-
code characters are used to draw a box without spacing (between the characters). I did initially use basic characters such as `+`
(plus) for corners, `-` (dash) for horizontal lines and `|` (pipes) for vertical lines - it just didn't look as great!

#### The $ function

The true power of [ZX][zx] is the `$`-function - this is the wrapper object for the [Node.js][nodejs] core `child_process` package.

```javascript
await $`find ${location} -type f -name ${type} -print0`.pipe(
  nothrow($`xargs -0 grep -n TODO`)
);
```

Having a look at the snippet (above), a few interesting things are going on. First, the `$`-function` is a "tagged template, template
literal" (more information about the subject, [here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals))!

The `$`-function will do a couple of interesting things:

It will of course spawn a [Node.js][nodejs] `process`, and allow it to have its output "piped" to another `process`. Using [ZX][zx],
we use the `pipe`-function, whereas if you were scripting using a traditional shell script (or [bash]) you would be using the `|`
(pipe) character.

It will also automatically wrap interpolated strings in quotation marks, and do so with clever logic. Given that you interpolate a
string of `const foo = 'foo';` into `` $`ls ${foo}`  `` - the process will receive the input `ls "foo"`. Given that you interpolate a
string of `const bar = '"bar";` into `` $`ls "${bar}"`  `` (I'm not sure why you'd do so) - the process will receive the input
`ls "'bar'"`!

Lastly, you might notice the usage of the `nothrow` - this makes sure that if the `xargs` command fails with a non-zero exit code, the
`$`-function won't throw an exception - basically ignoring any exit code (and happily continues to the next iteration of the loop)!

#### Process output

What is running command-line tools good for, if you're not able to work with the output? - not to worry, [ZX][zx] has got you covered
there as well!

```javascript
for (let match of process.stdout.split("\n")) {
  const [file, line, ...todo] = match.split(":").map((each) => each.trim());
  // ...logic for processing output go here
}
```

Having a look at the snippet (above), and having in mind that the `process` variable is actually provided by executing the previous
snippet, it's relatively intuitive what's going on.

We're looking at the standard output stream, and parsing it!

Now, in the snippet above, we're simply splitting the output - potentially allocating a vast amount of system memory, but the `stdout`
(and `stderr`) are `ReadableStream`-objects. This means that you can stream output, and keep memory utilization to an absolute minimum.

### Enhancements

If you're feeling adventurous I'd like to let the following be "an assignment for the reader" (that would be you!):

- Add additional parsing of the To-dos
  - Say, that if a `TODO` is followed by a "date-like" structure (`YYYY-MM-DD`) that is "in the future", it will print an error;
    that a dead-line (for the item at hand) has been missed.
  - Given the same "date-like" structure, you could warn about a dead-line approaching
- Add the snippet to your crontab configuration
  - This will ensure that the script is run at regular intervals, and you'll be reminded of To-do "dead-lines"!
- Add notifications of any errors (and warnings), using [Mailgun HTTP api](https://documentation.mailgun.com/en/latest/user_manual.html#sending-via-api)
  - This would require you to take in an API-key as option to script
  - If no API-key is provided, you should skip sending mail (and notify about it)
- Add a `--help` argument, to get information about usage, available arguments etc.

## Conclusion

I really like the option of using [ZX][zx] for scripting. It provides (me at least) with a simpler scripting option, when it comes
to providing a familiar syntax (when compared to [bash]).

It's powerful and flexible, and the only real down-side I see to using it, is the requirement upon [Node.js][nodejs]. This runtime
dependency may prevent you from using it on server's (due to companies and their security policies), whereas you can always depend
upon Posix shell scripts (or [bash] to some degree).

As with everything software development-wise, I recommend that you "take it for a spin"!

[zx]: https://github.com/google/zx
[nodejs]: https://nodejs.org/
[npm]: https://www.npmjs.com
[bash]: https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/
[puppet]: https://github.com/puppetlabs/puppet
[ansible]: https://github.com/ansible/ansible
[chef]: https://github.com/chef/automate
[sh]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shell_script
[chalk]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/chalk
